---
layout: post
title: "VisWeek 2011 day 0"
---

[VisWeek 2011](http://visweek.org) starts tomorrow, with two
workshops, three tutorials and the contest. Having helped organize the
workshops program, I'm obviously biased on the matter. Come attend the
workshops! They're fantastic. 

You get to choose between two great
events; it's a pity they run in parallel. The first
workshop is on visual analytics and health care, and in particular about
[getting physicians
to pay attention to us and vice-versa](http://www.visualanalyticshealthcare.org/). This perspective cannot be
stressed nearly enough, and it's obvious how important this topic
is. In particular, I'd like you to consider attending the panel they
will host at 11:00am. Let's get a conversation started between these
two universes!

(Yes, I was half-asleep when I typed the original post. The
uncertainty workshop is on monday!) The second workshop is on
[story-telling](http://data-stories.com/), which is noteworthy
in that it follows the extremely successful workshop from last year,
and should be very popular as well. The interaction with the
journalist community is very exciting, and getting people in newsrooms
to care about what we do, and us caring about what they need, is
well worth your attendance. I'll note a talk by New York Times' Brad
Stenger. 

I'll try to do some live-blogging, since not everyone is going to be
around for the whole week, in particular for the first few days. The
last couple of years were a complete live-blogging failure on my part,
but let's see if I can make it work this year.

If you see me around tomorrow, stop and say hi!
