---
layout: post
title: "VisWeek 2011 day 2"
---

The VisWeek keynote is just over; the fast-forward and the first VAST
session are now underway. There's more VAST in the afternoon, and also
what I think will be a great panel.

I thought that the keynote was somewhat disappointing. It seems wrong
to snark at an invited speaker, but I wish his talk had a little more
justification for the visualizations he presented; the animation of
the neural network process, for example, seemed to me to use
visualizations for precisely the wrong reasons: it showed something,
it looked good, but it never became clear what the visualization
taught the users. What's the point, then? Am I missing something here?

One paper I'm looking forward to seeing this morning is [Albuquerque et
al's Perception-Based Visual Quality Metrics](https://www.cg.tu-bs.de/upload/publications/Albuquerque2011PBQ.pdf). The interesting bit here
is that they use perceptual experiments to derive a metric through
explicit energy minimization. This is neat: the paper uses human
subjects where computers can't do a very good job, and computers where
humans do a good job. This is something that visualization papers tend
to get wrong: because the community is good at creating depictions of
data which are intelligible and attractive, we tend to forget that
computers are actually great at computing things!

In the afternoon, there's [Orion](http://vis.stanford.edu/papers/orion), Heer and Perer's system for
manipulating network data. The only systemsy tool I know for
generating and processing network data is GVPR, and it feels, ahem,
slightly outdated. It certainly gets simple jobs done, but AWK
expertise seems to be falling out of favor, and Heer has a good feel for
computational building blocks. I'm looking forward to that talk.

In the afternoon as well, there's van Wijk, Ware, Demiralp and
Laidlaw's aptly named panel: "Theories of Visualization: are there
any?". This continues the long-standing debate on how to
appropriately define and measure the goodness and utility of a
visualization. Old readers will remember my discussion on the topic at
the time of Laidlaw's capstone some years ago. This problem continues
to be important, continues to be hard, and continues to be completely
open.
