---
layout: post
title: "RIP, Qt"
---

In what seems now a long time ago, I wrote the following about
[Qt and Nokia](http://carlosscheidegger.wordpress.com/2009/01/16/nokia-buy-riverbank-computing/).

*Early last year, Nokia acquired Trolltech for \$153M, and there was much
worry about Qt, the great GUI toolkit. The fear was Nokia would focus
only on mobile devices, and cut off Qt's open source version. In an
incredibly smart move (and I have to say one I didn't see coming),
Nokia just announced it's making Qt available under LGPL.*

*Think about how this would have sounded 20 years ago: Big company pays
150 mil for small company, renounces said small company's major
revenue stream by giving its product away. Rest assured that Nokia
will lose Qt licensees. But as they correctly calculated, it does not
matter. If Nokia wants to fight Android and the iPhone, they'd better
have a decent software platform, and it better be free. 150 million is chump
change for them: Nokia's market cap is around U\$53 billion.*

*A more interesting problem (for us involved with the VisTrails
project, at least) is what happens with PyQt, the incredibly
well-designed Python bindings for Qt. PyQt is developed by Riverbank
Computing, which is really a synonym for ``Phil Thompson's one-man
show''. If you pay for Qt, buying PyQt for everyone essentially costs
you every sixth Qt license, which is not very much at all. But now
that Qt is LGPL, what is Phil to do?*

*Well, he can't really make PyQt LGPL, as he'd just sink his
company. But you could argue that he can't not make it LGPL
either. For once, PyQt would be the only commercial barrier for
writing commercial Python software with Qt, and I have a feeling that
people would actively try to find a way around that. More importantly,
with Qt being LGPL and no Python bindings to go with that, it'd be
just a matter of time until someone else starts an LGPL PyQt
clone. But it's essentially impossible that any new effort will be as
good as PyQt is. So, there will be fragmentation of the community and
a big waste of development effort. Crucially, this outcome is bad for
Nokia. If Phil sticks around by himself, chances are Nokia loses
money.*

*So for Nokia to keep around a great set Python bindings for Qt, they
just have to ensure Riverbank wants to make PyQt LGPL. And the easiest
way is simply to buy the company, hire Phil Thompson, and make him
PyQt dictator for life. So, Phil, it's time to buy a new suit!*

Now it is all but official, and the writing is on the wall for Qt. It
was announced today that Nokia are selling the Qt licensing rights to
[some random
company](http://www.digia.com/C2256FEF0043E9C1/0/405002251) (man, that is one ugly URL!). Qt is still head and shoulders
above any other GUI toolkit. I haven't kept up with PyQt, but it's not
looking good. [Pyside](http://www.pyside.org) are exactly the
kind of bindings I thought would surface; they have reached 1.0
last week. 

My point about Nokia, Android, and iOS also turned out to
be central to how this whole affair played out. It's sad that
after years of being a great product, Qt gets killed by
MS the cash juggernaut, and mostly as a side effect. Notice,
incidentally, that Nokia's market cap is about half of what it was
back then.

Don't get me wrong, Qt will be no doubt forked. But what made Qt great
was its documentation and its (comparably speaking) attention to API
design. No other open-source GUI toolkit I have used has come anywhere
close to it, and I have no reason to believe such a fork would inherit
these good traits from Qt. At least superficially, this seems to be
good news for [wxWidgets](http://www.wxwidgets.org/).

Still, as I write this, I can't shake the feeling that it is HTML5
that will be the lowest-common-denominator GUI toolkit for application
development (even for locally hosted, off-the-web deployments) of this
decade. But that's for another post.
