---
layout: post_paper
title: "Anteater: Interactive Visualization for Program Understanding"
tags: paper
venue: arxiv
thumb: 2019-arxiv-anteater
paper_link: /static/paper/arxiv_anteater_2019.pdf
---

## Citation

Rebecca Faust, Katherine Isaacs, William Z Bernstein, Michael Sharp, Carlos Scheidegger. Anteater: Interactive Visualization for Program Understanding. arXiv:1907.02872.

    @article{faust2019anteater,
      title={Anteater: Interactive Visualization for Program Understanding},
      author={Faust, Rebecca and Isaacs, Katherine and Bernstein, 
          William Z and Sharp, Michael and Scheidegger, Carlos},
      journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02872},
      year={2019}
    }

## Abstract

Understanding and debugging long, complex programs can be extremely
difficult; it often includes significant, manual program
instrumentation and searches through source files. In this paper, we
present Anteater, an interactive visualization system for tracing and
exploring the execution of a program. While existing debugging tools
often have visualization components, these components are often added
on top of an existing environment. In Anteater, in contrast,
visualization is a driving concern. We answer the following question:
what should a debugging tool look like if it were designed from the
ground up to support interactive visualization principles? Anteater
automatically instruments source code to capture execution behavior
along with variables and expressions specified by the user. After
generating the execution trace, Anteater presents the execution
information through interactive visualizations. Anteater supports
interactions that help with tasks such as discovering important
structures in the execution, learning dependencies, and understanding
and debugging unexpected behaviors. To assess the utility of Anteater,
we present several real-world case studies that show how Anteater
compares favorably to existing approaches. Finally, we discuss
limitations of our system and where further research is needed.

## Resources

* [Paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1907.02872.pdf)

