---
layout: post
title: "More Thoughts"
---

Now that [it's out in the
open](https://cscheid.net/2019/01/02/burnout.html), I've a few more
thoughts.

Before anything else: thank you all for being so supportive - most of
you who've expressed support to me are people who I deeply care about,
and people who I look up to, very seriously.  I want to address some
concerns a few of you have raised, and I want to talk a little more
about why I chose to be public about this.  I have had the chance to
reflect on my current state of mind, and I want to offer some
perspective.

It's true that I'm burned out about work, but I want to be clear: it's
not local circumstances that have burned me out.  UA has always been
and continues to be a great place to work. I should have made that
clearer in my post - the department has been nothing short of stellar
towards my being here so far, and I see no reason why this would
change in the future. (In fact, part of why I choose to write about
this is to reconcile my positive feelings towards my work environment
with my negative feelings towards the work itself. I'm sure there's a
lot of unpacking to be done here.)

To put it differently, what I'm going through is pretty much
self-inflicted. I might be partly a product of the time we're all
living in, but if I'm being true to myself, I have to admit that I
should have seen this coming. I am as much "stop lifting with your
back, already" as I am "oh no, you broke your arm".  I do appreciate
all of you telling me to be kind to myself. That I haven't done so is
certainly part of how I'm here. But I also want to be _true_ to
myself.  In acknowledging my role in the burnout I find myself in, I'm
hoping it will be less likely that I'll repeat harmful patterns.

Second, I think my tone might have implied that I think what I'm going
through is somehow special to me. It might not have been in my mind at
the time, but I didn't mean that at all. Everyone fights their own
battles. My intention is, rather, to force myself to confront the
image that "mental health issues happens to other people - I have my
stuff together"; clearly, this is just not the case, and I owe it to
myself to acknowledge it.

Finally: if you're reading this and thinking "but he doesn't _seem_
burned out": well, different people process things differently. When
things get overwhelming for me, I retreat into a pattern of "if
nothing else gets me out of this funk, then let's do a whole lot of
research".  This is, of course, the kind of behavior that is rewarded
in my field. But if I'm being honest, this pattern comes at least in
part at the expense of people around me, who pick up emotional and
service slack for me. That's neither sustainable nor right. At the
same time (and possibly partly because of it), I _have_ been
reasonably successful at research, and at least part of this success
has been at the expense of other things I shouldn't have
neglected. Part of coming out is acknowledging this social debt, even
if I can't pay it off right away. 

So, if you think you might be going through something similar: know
that you're not alone. If you want to talk about it, do send me a
note.



